---
title: Mumble 1.5.857
author: Hartmnt
date: 2025-10-11
categories:
  - Release
---

Today we release the second patch release in the Mumble 1.5.x series. This release includes fixes for undesired
ACL behavior. If you are a server administrator, please continue reading the detailed explanation.

You can download the new version from our [**Downloads page**]({{< relref "/downloads" >}}) or the
[**GitHub release page**](https://github.com/mumble-voip/mumble/releases/tag/v1.5.857) or from within your Windows client or software package
management system.

<!--more-->

## Changes to some ACL behavior

**Attention Server Administrators**:

We have fixed a few ACL-related behaviors that we have determined to be bugs. This is why we are including them in
this patch-release. If you have ACLs configured which were relying on that undesired behavior, you want to make sure to fix
your ACL configuration when updating your server to this release. We assume the number of impacted servers will be minimal and
adapting the ACLs in case your server is affected will be reasonably easy.

* Previously, both the ``Traverse`` and ``Write`` ACLs would be evaluated without taking the "in this channel" and "in sub-channels" context options into account. This is now fixed. You can now deny ``Traverse`` for sub-channels, while the channel you are defining the ACL in is still traversable. ({{< issue 3579 >}})
* Previously, in addition to normal ACL inheritance rules, the ``Write`` ACL would always be inherited from the parent channel. For consistency, this was removed. To prevent "ungovernable" channels, users who are granted ``Write`` on the root channel, will be able to ``Write`` in any channel of the server, no matter what these sub-channels configure. ({{< issue 6512 >}})
* Previously, the ``Register`` ACL was used to determine, if a client was able to see extended user information including user IP address and user-agent. This was changed to now require the ``Ban`` ACL. ({{< issue 6697 >}})
* Due to the client being able to uncheck both context option checkboxes in the ACL editor, admins could create "dangling" ACLs that were present, but had no effect. Starting with this release,
clients will not be able to create these "dangling" ACLs. Existing "dangling" ACLs will not be affected by this unless they are modfied. ({{< issue 6512 >}})


## Changelog

This is the full changelog for this release (changes relative to the Mumble 1.5.735 release).

### Client

- Changed: Client-side max image width and height for better legibility ({{< issue 6825 >}})
- Fixed: Bug with default values for talking UI options ({{< issue 6728 >}})
- Fixed: Enable "Paste" action, if there is an image in clipboard ({{< issue 6790 >}})
- Fixed: Infinite loop and log spam on ALSA input device disconnection ({{< issue 6702 >}})
- Fixed: Limit size of images pasted in RichTextEditor ({{< issue 6790 >}})
- Fixed: Memory leaks due to BIO_NOCLOSE ({{< issue 6604 >}})
- Fixed: Message size limit bypass ({{< issue 6875 >}})
- Fixed: Missing theme changes on macOS ({{< issue 6925 >}})
- Fixed: Network packets of exactly max size are rejected ({{< issue 6924 >}})
- Fixed: Prevent local muted users from triggering attenuation ({{< issue 6747 >}})
- Fixed: Prevent unchecking both ACL context checkboxes ({{< issue 6512 >}})
- Fixed: Rare crash when using PipeWire ({{< issue 6852 >}})
- Fixed: Remove "Write" ACL parent channel inheritance ({{< issue 6512 >}})
- Fixed: Restart audio system when a Windows audio device we use reappears ({{< issue 6777 >}})
- Fixed: Shortcut data not being saved ({{< issue 6832 >}})
- Fixed: Specify version when loading/saving MainWindow state ({{< issue 6584 >}})
- Fixed: Text-To-Speech volume on macOS ({{< issue 6896 >}})
- Fixed: Update chat bar, if selected channel changes name ({{< issue 6748 >}})
- Fixed: Unlink active plugin before unloading ({{< issue 6602 >}})
- Fixed: Volume adjustment slider keyboard inputs ({{< issue 6841 >}})


### Server

- Changed: Extended user stats now requires "Ban" ACL ({{< issue 6700 >}})
- Fixed: ACL parsing of "Traverse" and "Write" ACL ({{< issue 6512 >}})
- Fixed: Missing permission check on msgQueryUsers ({{< issue 6916 >}})
- Fixed: Network packets of exactly max size are rejected ({{< issue 6924 >}})
- Fixed: Prevent server startup when providing empty certificate files
- Fixed: Remove "Write" ACL parent channel inheritance ({{< issue 6512 >}})


### Windows Installer

- Added: Bundle C++ redistributables on Windows ({{< issue 6789 >}}) Many thanks to [**@sqwishy**](https://froghat.ca)!


## Known issues

- macOS binaries not being signed/notarized (overlay installer not signed) ({{< issue 4263 >}})
- Overlay blocked by BattleEye (Whitelisting request has been ignored)
- Overlay blocked by CS:GO Trusted Mode
